Friends, welcome to Word on Fire Catholic Ministries.
Word on Fire is an apostolate dedicated to the mission of evangelization.
Using media both old and new to share the faith on every continent,
and to facilitate an encounter with Christ and His Church.
The efforts of Word on Fire engage the culture and bring the transformative power of God's Word where it is most needed.
Today, we invite you to join Bishop Robert Barron as he preaches the Gospel and shares the warmth and light of Christ with each one of us.
Peace be with you. Friends, we come to this wonderful feast of the Ascension of the Lord. We have this feast right at the end of the Easter season as a prelude to Jesus.
1 Peter 1, verse 12. And getting the ascension of the Lord right is very important for understanding many aspects of the church's
100% church's life. And so I want to dwell on that a little bit with you today.
um, ah,
I want to do so under two headings. The first, I'm going to call more political. The second, I'm going to call more liturgical.
They are both hinted at in the great statement in the creed that we recite week after week.
He ascended into heaven.
And is seated
at the right hand of the Father.
So every week we say that as part of the Nicene Creed.
He ascended into heaven and is seated at the top of the mountain.
At the right hand of the Father.
What does that mean?
Well, first of all, and I've made this point with you before, but it's worth making again.
The ascension of the Lord does not mean his translation to another place within the cosmos.
So think of Jesus moving from Capernaum to Jerusalem. He's moving from point A to point B within the space-time continuum.
If we think of the ascension as Jesus simply like taking off like a rocket and going up into space,
Well, heck, even if he's moving at the speed of light in 2,000 years, he'd still be within the confines of the Milky Way galaxy.
It doesn't mean he's moving. Something as trivial as moving from one place to another within the universe.
Rather this,
It's the transition of Jesus from
This dimensional system
to the higher dimensional system that the Bible calls heaven.
Now, when you see heaven or the clouds or the heavens, that's a symbol, right?
So we point to the sky as an evocation of something that is eternal.
Beyond. Beyond.
Our ordinary experience beyond the confines of this world.
We're speaking of the dimension of God.
And I'll think for a minute, everybody.
God is not an item within the universe.
The mistake that atheists old and new make over and over again is they think of God as a big being within the context of the universe. And then they look around for him. Some say he's here.
Some say he's here. Some say he's not. But it's getting the whole thing wrong. Right.
The creator.
20% of the time-space continuum is not an item within the time-space continuum.
We say that God is beyond space and beyond time.
So God's eternity, for example, read Thomas Aquinas on this, doesn't mean that God
It lives in everlasting time like a vampire who never fades away. It means God exists in a manner that is transcendent to time. Now, here's an example.
Here's an important point.
This doesn't make God irrelevant to our experience. On the contrary, it makes God
More
present to it, more available to the totality of it. The eternal God, who is beyond time, yes,
Presses upon every moment of time.
God, who's beyond space, yes.
It is present to every and all.
Place
Now, I've used this image before, but I've always found it very useful to understand this kind of paradox.
You think of a
Square on a two-dimensional plane.
Now,
Move to a higher dimension, move to a three-dimensional system.
and the square becomes like a cube. Now a cube can fit in it, so to speak, an infinite number of squares.
It can be present to an infinity of squares.
Because it exists at a level transcendent to the two dimensions.
Think of a circle in relation to a sphere in three dimensions. The sphere can contain an infinite number of circles.
In a similar way.
God's dimension, which is beyond space and beyond time,
It can be present.
To every space and to every moment of time.
That's the paradox, but so much of the life of the church depends upon this. So the ascension of the Lord means that Jesus, who operated indeed within our time,
In our time-space continuum, we have
I can pinpoint, you know, around 2,000 years ago in ancient Palestine, that's where Jesus was.
But the ascended Christ now has entered into the divine dimension in such a way
that he can indeed impinge upon
All of space and all of time.
I'll give you an example. This morning, I'm in my chapel praying my holy hour, and I was doing the Jesus Prayer. You know, Lord Jesus Christ, I'm believing God, have mercy on me, a sinner
I wasn't just remembering some figure from long ago. I wasn't engaging in some subjective fantasy.
No, I was in dialogue with Jesus.
And that's why people all over the world,
It can be praying at the same time to the same Jesus. Amen.
Because now ascended
He can be present to every and all moment.
Of time and space.
Okay. Now, let's pursue this with what I'm calling the political interpretation of mind. Okay.
This ascended Christ
Is now able
to direct operations in his church like the general of a great army who is overseeing all the operations and pinching through his command upon
Upon all of them, organizing and coordinating the effort.
How wonderful that the Acts of the Apostles, from which we read during the Easter season, commences with...
The account of the ascension.
Because that's the condition for the possibility now of Jesus from the height of this higher dimension.
Now commanding.
The work of his church
It's why we speak of his
obsession or his being seated at the right hand of the Father? Well, in the ancient world, the seat of
That could be the attitude of the teacher, right? The teacher would sit and the students would be at his feet, right?
It's also the attitude of the ruler.
From his chair, he rules.
Sitting at the right hand of the father.
Jesus is being envisioned here as a kind of
Plenipotentiary of the father
The one who is ruling with the full authority of the Father.
Yeah. Don't see this in a subordinacious way as though Jesus is someone less than the Father. No, no. He's at the right hand of the Father with the planopotentia, the full power.
power of the Father. And now is 100% true.
Directing operations.
That's Jesus now in relation to the totality of the church. Now, to anticipate next week, Jesus.
What are he and the Father going to do from their exalted place, but send out
The Holy Spirit
To enable and equip his apostles to do his work in the world.
Yes. That's the political, if you want, dimension of the ascension, right?
Christ the Lord.
So when Paul keeps saying, "Jesus, carry us."
As a challenge, of course,
to the claim that Caesar was the Lord. No, no, Jesus is the true Lord who is the commander.
The commander of all things, ordering his church according to his purposes.
Okay, that's one dimension, a very important one, I think, of the ascension, right?
The second one I'm going to call liturgical.
liturgical and I want to refer to
So our text for today for the Feast of the Ascension, taken from 1 John 3, verses 1-
Okay. The wonderful and mysterious letter to the Hebrews. If you have a chance during this season, read that letter. It is complicated, and you probably should get a good commentary on it.
But it repays the effort.
But listen out to this line from the letter to the Hebrews.
Christ did not enter into a sanctuary made by hands.
A copy of the true one
But heaven itself
that he might now appear before God
On our behalf.
Now, there's a lot packed into this.
Ancient Israel saw the temple
As a copy if you want
Of the true
Heavenly temple
Read the book of Revelation. You find something very similar. When the seer looks through and he sees the heavenly court saying,
where God is being continually praised.
The temple on earth was seen as a mystical participation, a symbolic reflection of the temple in heaven. Again, that higher dimension.
You don't think the sky. Think higher dimension. Yeah.
Jesus' cross
was indeed a great act of sacrifice.
His bloody sacrifice on the cross. But listen now.
Because Jesus is not just a human figure, but is divine.
What Jesus did on the cross...
Has a resonance
In heaven.
It has an eternal implication.
The historical sacrifice on the cross was
Participates in
is reflective of.
The perfect heavenly sacrifice of Christ.
In the temple in heaven.
That's why we hear in that same letter to the Hebrews.
He entered this
heavenly temple
Not with the blood of goad and calves.
But with his own blood.
Now, this is a reference to Yom Kippur, the Day of Atonement, the highest of the High Holy Days.
100%. When once a year, when once a year
The high priest in the temple would enter into the holy of holies, and he'd slaughter an animal there. He would sprinkle the blood around, and then he'd come out through the veil.
veil. Remember the veil that is torn at the crucifixion? He comes out through that veil and he sprinkles the people. It was the great moment of sacrifice whereby Israel
Israel was reconciled to the Lord.
We're the sins of the nation we're taking away and the mercy of God offer.
See, what did they see in the cross of Jesus? That all of this over a thousand years, all of this temple sacrifice with the blood of goats and calves was but
But an anticipation of.
the true and fulfilling sacrifice of Jesus on the cross. Now, one more step.
And that sacrifice, because it's made by the one who is
a heavenly figure, the Son of God,
Has an eternal resonance.
In the heavenly
Temple,
So he, Jesus, entered that
"'High, heavenly temple, not with the blood of goats and calves, but with his own blood.'"
And there he stands.
Eternally offering to the father
A pleasing sacrifice.
Okay
You say, I guess I understand that, but what's the implication for us? Well,
Every time.
We.
A ten.
Mass.
This is foremost, should be foremost in our minds.
What's the mass here below?
When the priest wearing not
1. Doctoral robes. Say, a Protestant... 2.
The minister might come out with Dr. Robes. He's just there to teach. Yeah.
But the priest...
That's a temple figure. It comes out in temple garb. He works at an altar and a sacrifice, namely that of Jesus, is re-perfect.
We presented
In an unbloody manner.
And that sacrifice at every church all over the world, keep in mind the eternal impinges upon the temporal, right, in every way.
In every parish, every cathedral, every chapel,
Every private mass, the grandest mass, all of them,
Participate mystically
in the great act of sacrifice offered by Jesus in the heavenly house.
Place.
All of them are seen as a
mystical
Reflection.
Of that eternal sacrifice.
Jesus is offering continually
Before the Father.
This is why the mass only makes sense in light of the ascension. Do you see what I mean?
Yeah. If Jesus is a great, you know, spiritual teacher from long ago, well, heck, we can get together and we can remember him and we tell stories about him and fine, fine. But that's not at all.
I don't know what the mass is. The mass is even now, even now, even now.
in this mystical manner, participating in the eternal sacrifice of Christ, which again, thinks spheres and circles and cubes and squares, contains, and
Every mass across all of space and time.
That's made possible only by the fact that Jesus is ascended into heaven.
And,
present in the eternal temple.
Think on these things, everybody, as we celebrate the Feast of the Ascension.
Our activity in the world as his apostles depends upon.
The ascension.
Every time we celebrate the Mass,
We are mindful of the ascended Christ.
And God bless you.
Thank you for listening to this week's homily from Bishop Robert Barron.
For more resources from Bishop Barron, please visit wordonfire.org.